README.md, before:

# Ollama + AX650/LLM8850 NPU Integration

![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-ready--for--hardware-brightgreen)
![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/platform-Raspberry_Pi_5-red)
![NPU](https://img.shields.io/badge/NPU-AX650%2FLLM8850-blue)

> **Run Ollama at 15-25 tokens/sec on Raspberry Pi 5 using AX650/LLM8850 NPU hardware!**

This project integrates [Ollama](https://ollama.com) with AXERA's AX650/LLM8850 NPU accelerator, enabling fast on-device LLM inference perfect for edge AI applications and interactive installations.

## ✨ Features

- 🚀 **10x Faster** than CPU-only inference on Raspberry Pi
- 🔌 **Drop-in Replacement** - Use standard Ollama API/CLI
- 🎯 **Auto-Detection** - Automatically uses NPU for `.axmodel` files  
- 🛠️ **Local Development** - Dummy mode for testing without hardware
- 📊 **Health Monitoring** - Temperature, memory, NPU utilization tracking
- 🎨 **Production Ready** - Systemd services, error recovery, logging

## 📊 Performance

| Model | Hardware | Speed | Improvement |
|-------|----------|-------|-------------|
| Qwen3-4B | AX650 NPU | 15-25 tok/s | 10x faster |
| Qwen3-4B | Pi 5 CPU | 1-3 tok/s | baseline |

## 🏗️ Architecture

\`\`\`
Ollama (port 11434) → AX650 Backend (port 5002) → PyAXEngine → NPU Hardware
\`\`\`

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Raspberry Pi 5 with AX650/LLM8850 hardware
- Ubuntu 22.04+
- Python 3.10+
- Go 1.21+ (for building Ollama)

### Installation

\`\`\`bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/gregm123456/ollama_ax650_pi.git
cd ollama_ax650_pi
git submodule update --init --recursive

# Setup Python backend
cd ollama_ax650_integration_mvp
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install axengine-0.1.3-py3-none-any.whl
pip install -r requirements-hardware.txt

# Start backend
export AX650_MODEL_PATH=/path/to/your/model
python backend.py &

# Build Ollama (requires Go)
cd ../ollama
go build -o ollama-ax650 .

# Run Ollama
./ollama-ax650 serve &

# Create and run model
echo "FROM /path/to/your/model" > Modelfile
./ollama-ax650 create qwen3-ax650 -f Modelfile
./ollama-ax650 run qwen3-ax650 "Hello, world!"
\`\`\`

## 📚 Documentation

| Document | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| [BUILD_GUIDE.md](BUILD_GUIDE.md) | Complete build and deployment guide |
| [PROJECT_COMPLETE.md](PROJECT_COMPLETE.md) | Project overview and architecture |
| [HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md](ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md) | SDK integration details |
| [OLLAMA_INTEGRATION.md](ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/OLLAMA_INTEGRATION.md) | Ollama setup instructions |
| [QUICK_REFERENCE.md](ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/QUICK_REFERENCE.md) | Command cheat sheet |

## 🧪 Testing

\`\`\`bash
# Test backend
cd ollama_ax650_integration_mvp
./test_hardware_integration.sh

# Test through Ollama
curl http://localhost:11434/api/generate -d '{
  "model": "qwen3-ax650",
  "prompt": "What is an NPU?"
}'
\`\`\`

## 🗂️ Project Structure

\`\`\`
ollama_ax650_pi/
├── ollama/                        # Ollama submodule with AX650 integration
│   └── llm/llm_ax650.go          # AX650 backend implementation
│
├── ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/  # Python backend
│   ├── backend.py                 # Flask API with axengine SDK
│   ├── ollama_adapter.py          # Ollama integration helper
│   └── test_hardware_integration.sh
│
├── ax650_raspberry_pi_services/   # Reference projects and SDK docs
│
├── BUILD_GUIDE.md                 # Build instructions
└── PROJECT_COMPLETE.md            # Complete documentation
\`\`\`

## 🎯 Use Cases

- 🎨 **Interactive Art Installations** - Fast, offline LLM responses
- 🤖 **Edge AI Applications** - On-device intelligence without cloud
- 🏠 **Smart Home Assistants** - Privacy-first voice/chat interfaces
- 🎓 **Educational Projects** - Learn edge AI and NPU programming
- 🔬 **Research Prototypes** - Quick iteration on NPU-accelerated models

## 🛠️ Development Status

- ✅ **Backend:** Complete with SDK integration
- ✅ **Ollama Integration:** Working with auto-detection
- ✅ **Documentation:** Comprehensive guides
- ✅ **Testing:** Automated test suites
- 🔄 **Hardware Validation:** Awaiting Pi deployment

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! Areas of interest:
- Streaming response support
- Additional model formats
- Performance optimizations
- Documentation improvements

## 📄 License

This project follows the licenses of its components:
- Ollama: MIT License
- PyAXEngine: MIT License
- Integration code: MIT License

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [AXERA-TECH](https://github.com/AXERA-TECH) for AX650 SDK and PyAXEngine
- [Ollama](https://ollama.com) for the amazing LLM server
- Reference projects in ax650_raspberry_pi_services/

## 📞 Support

- **Issues:** Open a GitHub issue
- **Documentation:** See docs/ directory
- **Hardware:** AX650 SDK documentation in reference_projects_and_documentation/

---

**Status:** Code complete, ready for hardware deployment! 🚀

*Built for interactive art installations on Raspberry Pi 5*

Commit message:

Update documentation to include local Go toolchain usage and add helper script for integration testing

README.md, after:

# Ollama + AX650/LLM8850 NPU Integration

![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-ready--for--hardware-brightgreen)
![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/platform-Raspberry_Pi_5-red)
![NPU](https://img.shields.io/badge/NPU-AX650%2FLLM8850-blue)

> **Run Ollama at 15-25 tokens/sec on Raspberry Pi 5 using AX650/LLM8850 NPU hardware!**

This project integrates [Ollama](https://ollama.com) with AXERA's AX650/LLM8850 NPU accelerator, enabling fast on-device LLM inference perfect for edge AI applications and interactive installations.

## ✨ Features

- 🚀 **10x Faster** than CPU-only inference on Raspberry Pi
- 🔌 **Drop-in Replacement** - Use standard Ollama API/CLI
- 🎯 **Auto-Detection** - Automatically uses NPU for `.axmodel` files  
- 🛠️ **Local Development** - Dummy mode for testing without hardware
- 📊 **Health Monitoring** - Temperature, memory, NPU utilization tracking
- 🎨 **Production Ready** - Systemd services, error recovery, logging

## 📊 Performance

| Model | Hardware | Speed | Improvement |
|-------|----------|-------|-------------|
| Qwen3-4B | AX650 NPU | 15-25 tok/s | 10x faster |
| Qwen3-4B | Pi 5 CPU | 1-3 tok/s | baseline |

## 🏗️ Architecture

\`\`\`
Ollama (port 11434) → AX650 Backend (port 5002) → PyAXEngine → NPU Hardware
\`\`\`

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Raspberry Pi 5 with AX650/LLM8850 hardware
- Ubuntu 22.04+
- Python 3.10+
- Go 1.21+ (for building Ollama)

### Installation

\`\`\`bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/gregm123456/ollama_ax650_pi.git
cd ollama_ax650_pi
git submodule update --init --recursive

# Setup Python backend
cd ollama_ax650_integration_mvp
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install axengine-0.1.3-py3-none-any.whl
pip install -r requirements-hardware.txt

# Start backend
export AX650_MODEL_PATH=/path/to/your/model
python backend.py &

# Build Ollama (requires Go)
cd ../ollama
go build -o ollama-ax650 .

Note: This repo uses a local Go toolchain in `~/go-toolchain` in some development runs to avoid committing tarballs into Git. If you keep a local toolchain, add it to your `PATH`:

```bash
export PATH=$HOME/go-toolchain/bin:$PATH
```

There's also a helper script at the repo root `run_integration.sh` that automates starting the backend and attempting an Ollama build/run for a quick smoke test — edit it before using.

# Run Ollama
./ollama-ax650 serve &

# Create and run model
echo "FROM /path/to/your/model" > Modelfile
./ollama-ax650 create qwen3-ax650 -f Modelfile
./ollama-ax650 run qwen3-ax650 "Hello, world!"
\`\`\`

## 📚 Documentation

| Document | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| [BUILD_GUIDE.md](BUILD_GUIDE.md) | Complete build and deployment guide |
| [PROJECT_COMPLETE.md](PROJECT_COMPLETE.md) | Project overview and architecture |
| [HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md](ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md) | SDK integration details |
| [OLLAMA_INTEGRATION.md](ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/OLLAMA_INTEGRATION.md) | Ollama setup instructions |
| [QUICK_REFERENCE.md](ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/QUICK_REFERENCE.md) | Command cheat sheet |

## 🧪 Testing

\`\`\`bash
# Test backend
cd ollama_ax650_integration_mvp
./test_hardware_integration.sh

# Test through Ollama
curl http://localhost:11434/api/generate -d '{
  "model": "qwen3-ax650",
  "prompt": "What is an NPU?"
}'
\`\`\`

## 🗂️ Project Structure

\`\`\`
ollama_ax650_pi/
├── ollama/                        # Ollama submodule with AX650 integration
│   └── llm/llm_ax650.go          # AX650 backend implementation
│
├── ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/  # Python backend
│   ├── backend.py                 # Flask API with axengine SDK
│   ├── ollama_adapter.py          # Ollama integration helper
│   └── test_hardware_integration.sh
│
├── ax650_raspberry_pi_services/   # Reference projects and SDK docs
│
├── BUILD_GUIDE.md                 # Build instructions
└── PROJECT_COMPLETE.md            # Complete documentation
\`\`\`

## 🎯 Use Cases

- 🎨 **Interactive Art Installations** - Fast, offline LLM responses
- 🤖 **Edge AI Applications** - On-device intelligence without cloud
- 🏠 **Smart Home Assistants** - Privacy-first voice/chat interfaces
- 🎓 **Educational Projects** - Learn edge AI and NPU programming
- 🔬 **Research Prototypes** - Quick iteration on NPU-accelerated models

## 🛠️ Development Status

- ✅ **Backend:** Complete with SDK integration
- ✅ **Ollama Integration:** Working with auto-detection
- ✅ **Documentation:** Comprehensive guides
- ✅ **Testing:** Automated test suites
- 🔄 **Hardware Validation:** Awaiting Pi deployment

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! Areas of interest:
- Streaming response support
- Additional model formats
- Performance optimizations
- Documentation improvements

## 📄 License

This project follows the licenses of its components:
- Ollama: MIT License
- PyAXEngine: MIT License
- Integration code: MIT License

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [AXERA-TECH](https://github.com/AXERA-TECH) for AX650 SDK and PyAXEngine
- [Ollama](https://ollama.com) for the amazing LLM server
- Reference projects in ax650_raspberry_pi_services/

## 📞 Support

- **Issues:** Open a GitHub issue
- **Documentation:** See docs/ directory
- **Hardware:** AX650 SDK documentation in reference_projects_and_documentation/

---

**Status:** Code complete, ready for hardware deployment! 🚀

*Built for interactive art installations on Raspberry Pi 5*
