ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/INTEGRATION_SUMMARY.md, before:

# Hardware Integration Complete - Summary

**Date:** November 23, 2025  
**Status:** ✅ Code Complete, Ready for Hardware Testing

## What Was Accomplished

### 1. SDK Integration Architecture
- **Backend Framework:** Python + Flask HTTP API
- **SDK Interface:** axengine.InferenceSession (PyAXEngine)
- **Fallback Mode:** Dummy implementation for local development
- **API Endpoints:** `/load`, `/generate`, `/health`

### 2. Core Features Implemented

#### Model Loading (`/load` endpoint)
- InferenceSession-based model loading
- Support for split prefill/decode models (LLM optimization)
- Embedding weight loading from NumPy arrays
- KV cache initialization for context management
- Automatic detection of model structure

#### Text Generation (`/generate` endpoint)
- Autoregressive generation pipeline structure
- Configurable parameters: `max_tokens`, `temperature`, `top_p`, `top_k`
- Token sampling implementation (with placeholders for full tokenizer)
- KV cache management across decode steps
- Support for both single-model and prefill/decode architectures

#### Health Monitoring (`/health` endpoint)
- Backend type reporting (dummy/axengine/pyaxcl)
- Model load status
- Temperature monitoring (placeholder for hardware)
- Memory usage tracking (placeholder for hardware)
- NPU utilization (placeholder for hardware)

### 3. Documentation Created

| Document | Purpose |
|----------|---------|
| `HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md` | Complete guide to SDK integration, code examples, troubleshooting |
| `requirements-hardware.txt` | Dependencies needed on Raspberry Pi |
| `test_hardware_integration.sh` | Automated test suite for validation |
| `STATUS.md` | Updated with Phase 4 progress and decision log |

### 4. Code Architecture

```
backend.py
├── AX650Backend class
│   ├── __init__(): SDK detection (axengine/pyaxcl/dummy)
│   ├── load_model(): InferenceSession model loading
│   ├── _initialize_kv_caches(): LLM context buffer setup
│   ├── generate(): Main generation entry point
│   ├── _generate_axengine(): SDK-specific generation
│   └── _generate_pyaxcl(): Alternative SDK support
└── Flask routes
    ├── POST /load: Load model
    ├── POST /generate: Generate text
    └── GET /health: System status
```

## Test Results

✅ **All tests passing in dummy mode:**
- Backend starts successfully
- Health endpoint returns correct status
- Generate endpoint handles requests with parameters
- No hardware errors (as expected without AX650)

**Test Output:**
```json
{
    "backend_type": "dummy",
    "model_loaded": false,
    "model_path": null,
    "status": "ok"
}
```

## What's Ready for Hardware

### ✅ Completed
1. SDK API integration structure
2. Model loading pipeline
3. KV cache management
4. Generation loop architecture
5. Token sampling utilities
6. Health monitoring framework
7. Comprehensive documentation
8. Test suite

### 🔄 Needs Hardware Testing
1. Real model loading on AX650
2. InferenceSession.run() with actual models
3. Tokenizer integration (transformers library)
4. Performance benchmarking
5. Temperature/memory monitoring implementation
6. Error recovery with real hardware failures

## Deployment Instructions

### On Raspberry Pi 5 with AX650:

```bash
# 1. Install PyAXEngine
cd /home/robot/ollama_ax650_pi/ollama_ax650_integration_mvp
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install axengine-0.1.3-py3-none-any.whl
pip install -r requirements-hardware.txt

# 2. Set model path
export AX650_MODEL_PATH=/path/to/qwen3-4b-model

# 3. Start backend
python backend.py

# 4. Run test suite
./test_hardware_integration.sh
```

## Next Steps

### Immediate (with Hardware Access)
1. **Deploy to Pi:** Transfer code and install PyAXEngine
2. **Test model loading:** Verify InferenceSession works with real .axmodel files
3. **Complete tokenizer:** Add transformers AutoTokenizer integration
4. **Validate generation:** Test full pipeline with Qwen3-4B or similar
5. **Benchmark:** Measure tokens/sec, latency, memory usage

### Near-term
1. **Implement hardware monitoring:** Real temperature/memory/NPU queries
2. **Error handling:** Add recovery for device errors
3. **Optimize performance:** Tune KV cache size, batch processing
4. **Integration testing:** Connect with Ollama

### Long-term
1. **Production hardening:** Logging, monitoring, restart logic
2. **Systemd service:** Auto-start on boot
3. **Multi-model support:** Dynamic model switching
4. **Advanced features:** Streaming responses, batch inference

## Key Files Modified

```
ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/
├── backend.py                        # Enhanced with full SDK integration
├── requirements.txt                  # Added numpy
├── requirements-hardware.txt         # New: Pi dependencies
├── HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md           # New: Complete integration guide
├── test_hardware_integration.sh      # New: Automated test suite
└── STATUS.md                         # Updated with Phase 4 progress
```

## Performance Expectations

Based on reference implementations and SDK documentation:

**Qwen3-4B on AX650:**
- Prefill: 100-200 tokens/sec
- Decode: 15-25 tokens/sec
- First token latency: 50-100ms
- Memory usage: ~4GB (model) + ~500MB (KV cache)

## Architecture Decisions

| Decision | Rationale |
|----------|-----------|
| Python backend | Faster prototyping, matches reference projects |
| Flask HTTP API | Simple, testable, easy to integrate |
| Separate prefill/decode | Optimizes LLM performance on NPU |
| Dummy fallback | Enables local development without hardware |
| axengine InferenceSession | Well-documented, Python-friendly, proven |

## Integration with Ollama

Two approaches documented in `HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md`:

**Option A (Recommended):** HTTP proxy
- Backend runs as service on port 5002
- Ollama calls backend via `ollama_adapter.py`
- Simpler, faster to implement
- Already working structure

**Option B (Advanced):** Native plugin
- Backend compiled into Ollama binary
- Requires Go/C++ changes in Ollama source
- Better performance, tighter integration
- More complex, harder to maintain

## Success Metrics

| Metric | Target | Status |
|--------|--------|--------|
| Backend starts | ✅ | Passing |
| Dummy mode works | ✅ | Passing |
| SDK integration code | ✅ | Complete |
| Model loading API | ✅ | Ready for testing |
| Generation pipeline | ✅ | Structure complete |
| Documentation | ✅ | Comprehensive |
| Hardware testing | 🔄 | Awaiting Pi access |

## Conclusion

The hardware integration code is **complete and ready for testing on Raspberry Pi 5 with AX650 hardware**. All SDK APIs are properly integrated based on reference implementations from AXERA-TECH. The code includes comprehensive error handling, logging, and fallback modes for development.

**The next critical step is deploying to actual hardware to:**
1. Validate the InferenceSession API works as expected
2. Test real model loading and inference
3. Benchmark performance
4. Complete tokenizer integration

The architecture is sound, the code is well-documented, and the test framework is in place. This represents a solid foundation for production deployment.

Commit message:

Update documentation to include local Go toolchain usage and add helper script for integration testing

ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/INTEGRATION_SUMMARY.md, after:

# Hardware Integration Complete - Summary

**Date:** November 23, 2025  
**Status:** ✅ Code Complete, Ready for Hardware Testing

## What Was Accomplished

### 1. SDK Integration Architecture
- **Backend Framework:** Python + Flask HTTP API
- **SDK Interface:** axengine.InferenceSession (PyAXEngine)
- **Fallback Mode:** Dummy implementation for local development
- **API Endpoints:** `/load`, `/generate`, `/health`

### 2. Core Features Implemented

#### Model Loading (`/load` endpoint)
- InferenceSession-based model loading
- Support for split prefill/decode models (LLM optimization)
- Embedding weight loading from NumPy arrays
- KV cache initialization for context management
- Automatic detection of model structure

#### Text Generation (`/generate` endpoint)
- Autoregressive generation pipeline structure
- Configurable parameters: `max_tokens`, `temperature`, `top_p`, `top_k`
- Token sampling implementation (with placeholders for full tokenizer)
- KV cache management across decode steps
- Support for both single-model and prefill/decode architectures

#### Health Monitoring (`/health` endpoint)
- Backend type reporting (dummy/axengine/pyaxcl)
- Model load status
- Temperature monitoring (placeholder for hardware)
- Memory usage tracking (placeholder for hardware)
- NPU utilization (placeholder for hardware)

### 3. Documentation Created

| Document | Purpose |
|----------|---------|
| `HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md` | Complete guide to SDK integration, code examples, troubleshooting |
| `requirements-hardware.txt` | Dependencies needed on Raspberry Pi |
| `test_hardware_integration.sh` | Automated test suite for validation |
| `STATUS.md` | Updated with Phase 4 progress and decision log |

### 4. Code Architecture

```
backend.py
├── AX650Backend class
│   ├── __init__(): SDK detection (axengine/pyaxcl/dummy)
│   ├── load_model(): InferenceSession model loading
│   ├── _initialize_kv_caches(): LLM context buffer setup
│   ├── generate(): Main generation entry point
│   ├── _generate_axengine(): SDK-specific generation
│   └── _generate_pyaxcl(): Alternative SDK support
└── Flask routes
    ├── POST /load: Load model
    ├── POST /generate: Generate text
    └── GET /health: System status
```

Recent local build notes:

- A local Go toolchain (`go` tarball) was kept in `~/go-toolchain` during development to avoid committing binary archives into the repo. If you use a local toolchain, ensure you add `~/go-toolchain/bin` to your `PATH` before running `go` commands.
- While building Ollama locally we applied two small compatibility fixes in the `ollama` submodule: an update to `llm/llm_ax650.go` to match the current `ml` package struct fields, and `go.mod` adjustments to allow the build with the toolchain available on this machine. On a fresh Pi install the recommended approach is to install a suitable system Go (recommended) and prefer not to change `go.mod` unless needed.
- A helper script `run_integration.sh` was added at the repository root to automate starting the backend and running a smoke test. Edit paths in that script to match your environment before using it.

## Test Results

✅ **All tests passing in dummy mode:**
- Backend starts successfully
- Health endpoint returns correct status
- Generate endpoint handles requests with parameters
- No hardware errors (as expected without AX650)

**Test Output:**
```json
{
    "backend_type": "dummy",
    "model_loaded": false,
    "model_path": null,
    "status": "ok"
}
```

## What's Ready for Hardware

### ✅ Completed
1. SDK API integration structure
2. Model loading pipeline
3. KV cache management
4. Generation loop architecture
5. Token sampling utilities
6. Health monitoring framework
7. Comprehensive documentation
8. Test suite

### 🔄 Needs Hardware Testing
1. Real model loading on AX650
2. InferenceSession.run() with actual models
3. Tokenizer integration (transformers library)
4. Performance benchmarking
5. Temperature/memory monitoring implementation
6. Error recovery with real hardware failures

## Deployment Instructions

### On Raspberry Pi 5 with AX650:

```bash
# 1. Install PyAXEngine
cd /home/robot/ollama_ax650_pi/ollama_ax650_integration_mvp
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install axengine-0.1.3-py3-none-any.whl
pip install -r requirements-hardware.txt

# 2. Set model path
export AX650_MODEL_PATH=/path/to/qwen3-4b-model

# 3. Start backend
python backend.py

# 4. Run test suite
./test_hardware_integration.sh
```

## Next Steps

### Immediate (with Hardware Access)
1. **Deploy to Pi:** Transfer code and install PyAXEngine
2. **Test model loading:** Verify InferenceSession works with real .axmodel files
3. **Complete tokenizer:** Add transformers AutoTokenizer integration
4. **Validate generation:** Test full pipeline with Qwen3-4B or similar
5. **Benchmark:** Measure tokens/sec, latency, memory usage

### Near-term
1. **Implement hardware monitoring:** Real temperature/memory/NPU queries
2. **Error handling:** Add recovery for device errors
3. **Optimize performance:** Tune KV cache size, batch processing
4. **Integration testing:** Connect with Ollama

### Long-term
1. **Production hardening:** Logging, monitoring, restart logic
2. **Systemd service:** Auto-start on boot
3. **Multi-model support:** Dynamic model switching
4. **Advanced features:** Streaming responses, batch inference

## Key Files Modified

```
ollama_ax650_integration_mvp/
├── backend.py                        # Enhanced with full SDK integration
├── requirements.txt                  # Added numpy
├── requirements-hardware.txt         # New: Pi dependencies
├── HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md           # New: Complete integration guide
├── test_hardware_integration.sh      # New: Automated test suite
└── STATUS.md                         # Updated with Phase 4 progress
```

## Performance Expectations

Based on reference implementations and SDK documentation:

**Qwen3-4B on AX650:**
- Prefill: 100-200 tokens/sec
- Decode: 15-25 tokens/sec
- First token latency: 50-100ms
- Memory usage: ~4GB (model) + ~500MB (KV cache)

## Architecture Decisions

| Decision | Rationale |
|----------|-----------|
| Python backend | Faster prototyping, matches reference projects |
| Flask HTTP API | Simple, testable, easy to integrate |
| Separate prefill/decode | Optimizes LLM performance on NPU |
| Dummy fallback | Enables local development without hardware |
| axengine InferenceSession | Well-documented, Python-friendly, proven |

## Integration with Ollama

Two approaches documented in `HARDWARE_INTEGRATION.md`:

**Option A (Recommended):** HTTP proxy
- Backend runs as service on port 5002
- Ollama calls backend via `ollama_adapter.py`
- Simpler, faster to implement
- Already working structure

**Option B (Advanced):** Native plugin
- Backend compiled into Ollama binary
- Requires Go/C++ changes in Ollama source
- Better performance, tighter integration
- More complex, harder to maintain

## Success Metrics

| Metric | Target | Status |
|--------|--------|--------|
| Backend starts | ✅ | Passing |
| Dummy mode works | ✅ | Passing |
| SDK integration code | ✅ | Complete |
| Model loading API | ✅ | Ready for testing |
| Generation pipeline | ✅ | Structure complete |
| Documentation | ✅ | Comprehensive |
| Hardware testing | 🔄 | Awaiting Pi access |

## Conclusion

The hardware integration code is **complete and ready for testing on Raspberry Pi 5 with AX650 hardware**. All SDK APIs are properly integrated based on reference implementations from AXERA-TECH. The code includes comprehensive error handling, logging, and fallback modes for development.

**The next critical step is deploying to actual hardware to:**
1. Validate the InferenceSession API works as expected
2. Test real model loading and inference
3. Benchmark performance
4. Complete tokenizer integration

The architecture is sound, the code is well-documented, and the test framework is in place. This represents a solid foundation for production deployment.
